Well, hello, everyone.
I'm delighted to say that joining me today
is Quentin Stafford-Frasier.
Quentin, how are you?
I am well, thank you.
I'm smiling already because we had such a good time last week
when we connected just to kind of get to know each other
and spend quite a lot of time having a great conversation.
So today we get to record it.
Quentin is a lot of things.
I was very impressed by, you have
a little description of the things
you've done in the past on your website.
And it goes on and on and on and on.
And I thought as a nice bit of context,
it would be great to read a little bit of that.
I did cut it up a little bit just for brevity.
I thought that might be an interesting way to just give
a broad sense of where you've been and where you're going.
Yeah, I'm sure you shouldn't believe everything
you read on the web, but yeah.
No, no, no.
That's why I'm going to ask you specifically about them.
But I thought that might be a fun way to do it.
So here we go.
So from your website, here's what I read.
It says, I'm a computer scientist, entrepreneur,
part-time academic, full-time gadget enthusiast
based in Cambridge, CEO of a small company called Telemark,
which does a mix of software development, tech consultancy,
photography, video production, teaching, and writing.
That alone has a lot to it, right, Quentin?
Well, I will come back to some of that.
Oh, I will, certainly.
However, it goes on.
And here we go.
For the past few years, I've also
held a part-time research post at Cambridge University's
computer lab, currently helping to organize the lab's
interactions with industry and with its alumni
and its audio-video output.
Previously, I was working on the Endeavor project,
exploring how computer vision and machine learning
can improve the experiences of car drivers.
I recently served as the interim director of engineering
at the Digital Catapult while they
searched for a permanent full-time appointee.
I have often been credited in the media
with inventing the webcam.
This I will certainly ask you about,
because you say, this is not entirely justified,
though I certainly did have something to do with it.
And so I'll touch on that in a sec.
I've also become rather fond of home automation,
connecting almost everything in my home
up through the amazing Home Assistant.
My previous startup before Telemark
was CamVine, Cambridge Visual Networks,
a company developing the new applications based
around network displays, which I started in 2007.
I was also a founder and managing director of the,
hmm, I don't know how to pronounce this, Medio project?
It's Indio.
Indio, love it.
I'll explain the name if you like later.
Oh, I will, yeah, we'll dive into a few of these things.
I don't know if we can touch on them all,
but the breadth here is what's impressive to me.
So Indio attempted to find new, more affordable network
computing architecture for the billions of people
who will never be able to afford one PC each.
That sounds well worth doing.
And just for a few more, before that I
was working at Exiblio, which I co-founded in 2004
with the aim of endowing paper documents with some
of the power of digital ones.
That sounds fascinating.
I also co-founded Noom Research, now DisplayLink,
in 2003 and was the CEO for its first couple of years.
I've authored and been listed as an inventor
on dozens of patents.
None of these has yet made me any money,
but they've done OK for other people.
Most are now owned by Google.
For several years I was a research scientist
at AT&T Labs in Cambridge, the lab which was formerly ORL.
I did a PhD.
Oh, Dr. Quentin.
I did a PhD on augmented reality in the Rainbow
Group at the University of Cambridge Computer Lab.
And it goes on.
I was, I think, the first full-time computer officer
at Cambridge College during this time.
I believe I may have created the world's first 10-set Venn
diagram, which is no small thing if you care about these things.
And then the last thing, I think I
ran the first web server in Cambridge.
I certainly ran the first one in the university, which then
became the platform for computer science students who
wanted to do projects around this new fangled,
worldwide web thing.
How is it hearing all of that from someone else reading it
for you?
I think I should have a much briefer website, really.
I do point out, I actually have quite
a substantial personal website.
And it's not that I think I'm deserving
of this great monument to myself.
It's just that I keep adding bits,
and I never get around to deleting stuff.
And that's what I gathered, was that this was,
because some of the things, which I didn't read,
mentioned like, you can hear me say hello here.
And in parentheses, you state, at the time that I wrote this,
that wasn't possible for all computers and all browsers.
So it's neat how you've just sort of added things as you go.
And I think that's actually really nice.
Well, I think that that recording of me saying hello,
which just says something like, hello, I'm Quentin,
pleased to meet you, is probably in an audio format
that it's remarkable still plays on most browsers.
Because I think I recorded it on my Spark station
back in about, you know, certainly not
this millennium anyway.
Back when not all browsers could play audio.
And if you actually had one that could,
then you could hear me say hello.
Pretty exciting.
That, I think, gives a sense that you've,
let's just say, you've been around.
You've seen some history that's pretty interesting.
I'm really old, so that's a nice way of saying yes.
Seasoned, perhaps, is a nice way to put it.
That's it.
That's good.
I like that.
But the early web, for me, I'm slightly younger than you.
For me, the early web, in my perspective,
was dial-up internet and the pains and beauties of that.
You know, having a home PC was a big thing.
Actually, the first computer I used
was a Commodore 64 that my father purchased
that was quite old at the time.
But you know, he forced us to use the spreadsheet there
for he would give us an allowance
and we would tabulate.
A man with foresight, clearly, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So that's my early history of five and a half inch
floppy disks.
But you've seen a little bit before that,
which really fascinates me.
Well, yeah, a little bit.
I mean, I do think that you and I
have been very fortunate to grow up when we did, right?
I think and be interested in technology.
It's like growing up and being interested in cars
at around the time of Henry Ford or whatever.
But computing has happened so fast.
And there's been all of these changes within a lifetime.
I really did have to sort of solder my first computer
together.
And I've gone from that in a very short period of time
to something like the iPhones and iPads sitting on my desk,
just so far away from that.
And you know, there aren't many fields,
I think, in which you could have that exciting a change
during your professional life.
And so that being said, I'm curious,
what was it about the computers?
You know, you mentioned you soldered your own, maybe
some pieces together.
And some of us still do that these days, just for fun.
Yeah, but you do it for fun, not because of necessity.
Right, not true necessity, exactly.
But I'm curious, what was it, as a young Quentin,
was it that really grabbed you about this relatively
new world?
Oh, that's a really interesting question.
I think, I mean, computers weren't
new when I was young in the sense
that you saw them on television programs and things.
You may see them on the deck of the Starship Enterprise, but.
As you should.
That's right.
But you know, I grew up just at the point
where suddenly this was something
my parents could afford.
They had to save up, but they could afford to give me one.
And only a few years before that, I had used a computer,
but it had been in a museum in London, the Science
Museum in London.
Not because it was an old thing, but the Science Museum
in London has a lot of new stuff as well as old stuff.
And I remember when I first got my hands,
actually I was able to type at a keyboard
and give an instruction to a computer, which
was one of these things you'd only seen in sort of Hollywood
movies up till then.
And so that sudden shift to being something
that you could sit in front of on the floor of your sitting
room at home.
And the only display we had was the television.
We only had one television in the house,
so nobody could watch TV while I was using my computer,
kind of thing.
Again, it was all of a sudden this unknown world.
I don't want to wax lyrical too early in this conversation,
but I think that I've often thought
that computer science, in some senses,
is almost the most creative subject, the most
creative, almost, art form.
I'd say maybe pushing it a bit.
But you start, when you're trying to solve something
using computers, you start often just with a thought.
You have a problem you want to solve,
you have thoughts about how to do it,
and you turn those thoughts into a solution to a problem,
or maybe a game, or maybe something beautiful,
or maybe something.
But in general, it's thought matter
translated into something tangible with possibly less
sort of intervening stuff than almost any other activity,
I think.
It really is capturing thoughts.
And anyway, that's what it felt like to me at the start.
Just simple things like, I don't know,
you want to make a picture of a cube
rotate on the screen in front of you, you had to think about,
oh, OK, so hang on, what's the coordinates of that
going to be?
Well, you want it rotated by this angle,
so you have to work out the cosine of this angle,
and work out where the appropriate coordinates
of this cube are going to be.
And then it looks a bit funny, and you realize that's
because you didn't include perspective.
So you say, oh, hang on, how does perspective work?
And it really was, you built everything from scratch there,
because when you turned your computer on,
all you got was a flashing prompt at which
you would have to type code.
And so if you wanted this thing to do anything,
you had to start being creative from the word go.
And that's something that we've largely lost in computers.
We turn them on as a tool to do something,
but you weren't forced to be creative the moment you turned
it on, as you were in the past.
And that's partly what the Raspberry Pi and things
like that have tried to recapture, of course.
Yeah, that conversion from imagination into reality,
and then just kind of exploring from there,
and seeing what's possible, right?
Yes, and in the past, if you wanted your computer
to be able to interact with the real world,
you did often have to plug things into the back,
and solder things together, and make up the circuit boards
yourself, and so on.
And the Raspberry Pi was started by friends of mine
who felt that the computer science students that we were
getting in the University at Cambridge,
they were coming in with actually much less experience
now than they had had in the past.
Because in the past, to use computers,
you sort of had to be an enthusiast.
Whereas now, people were coming in just thinking,
oh, computers might be interesting to learn about.
But they hadn't gone through that process
of having to understand it so much
before you could even use it.
And so the idea of the Raspberry Pi
was actually to give you a much more basic computer that
really didn't do very much for you out of the, you know,
when you plugged it in and turned it on.
And you had to understand a bit more about it
to accomplish anything.
And that was quite deliberate.
The hardware is quite capable of running all sorts of stuff.
I mean, it could have provided you
with a very slick experience out of the box.
But part of the idea was, no, actually, you
need to understand how power supplies work,
and how to write code, and so on,
and how operating systems boot up, and so on,
to a much greater degree to be able to use one of them.
And I think that's part of why it's been such a success.
You know, you mentioned you had to be an enthusiast
previously to really get into computers.
It seems almost the opposite these days,
in that we all use computers in our everyday lives,
from phones to everything else, really, to your car, even.
And yet, the enthusiasts are the one
going to these simpler machines like Raspberry
Pi's, and the single board computers, and such.
And so it almost feels like a reversal to me,
which is really fascinating.
Yes, I think that's probably right.
It's almost more like, you know, everybody drives a car.
So if you're an enthusiast, you get a classic car,
or you build a car yourself, or you put bins in your car,
and you have a camper van, or whatever it may be.
When something becomes a commodity,
then you need to find a new spin on it.
And that may be using computers to automate your home,
or it may be just actually turning on a computer
and sending an email with it is not something that, well,
it's less of an adventure now than it used to be.
So we find other things to do, right?
For sure, right.
And because everybody does it, right?
You want to find your own niche, or you want to,
if you want to make a difference to the world,
or even just a difference to your local bit of the world,
you have to do something different from what
everybody else is doing.
So I think that's part of the appeal.
You know, part of what has worried me in the past
has been exploring the idea that maybe we've
gotten to the point where computers
have done all of the things that humanity needs them to do.
And yet, when I reflect on that just slightly more,
especially in the context of you mentioning it as quite an art
form, I think, well, no, we're really just started, aren't we?
Like, certainly computers have taken us to the moon,
and there's all sorts of things on other planets now.
And yet, I think in some ways we're just started.
Like, do you feel like there's a lot more possibility there
in this realm?
Yes, I think there is a great deal more.
But I think the rapid acceleration
at the start of computing has sort of tails off for a while.
I think, actually, the analogy with cars
is kind of interesting here.
Because between school and college,
I worked for a car firm, you know, just for a year
and a half, for Austin Rover cars, as they were then.
And it was a useful experience of industry,
but it wasn't at all sexy.
There was nothing about it that made
me want to carry on doing this after I finished
as a student and so on.
I thought that, essentially, cars had become dull,
and nothing really new was happening with them,
and hadn't really happened for 50 or 100 years.
And then all of a sudden, a few years ago,
I got into doing stuff related to cars again.
Because you had this combination of electric vehicles,
which were completely changing how cars were and could
be built, and what they were like to drive, and so on.
And you had this whole idea of autonomous vehicles,
self-driving cars, which, again, was very interesting
technologically.
Car companies were having to become software companies.
But also, the whole shape of a vehicle.
What does a car look like?
Does it have to be, do you have to have everybody
facing forwards if the car can drive itself?
And all of these sort of things are thrown open
for innovation again.
We have vehicles that are bigger, and smaller,
and quieter, and different shapes, and so on,
in a way that so much has been defined in the past
by the basic shape of an internal combustion
engine, and four wheels, and a gearbox, and so on.
And I think we're at a very exciting time now
to be in the automobile industry, which, again, we
haven't really had, I don't think.
I mean, what's changed before this advent
of electric vehicles?
What's changed in the last five decades?
Very, very little.
Yeah, I think four-wheel drive, or all-wheel drive,
in rally racing was really a huge innovation.
But even that's quite mechanical, right?
But it didn't fundamentally change the shape of cars.
I mean, I guess you could say automatic gearboxes.
Sure, sure.
Which some people still aren't keen on.
So there have been various small innovations.
But I still don't know how much I'd
buy the dream of fully self-driving vehicles.
But it seems to me that if we even get close to that,
then the way we think of and use cars
could be completely different.
And I have some examples I like giving of this.
I mean, the thing I'm almost most exciting,
I know you've done a lot of stuff with RVs in Jupiter.
And, or campervans.
And I've always thought that what I really want
is a self-driving campervan, or motorhome, or RV.
One where in the evening I could, you know,
I don't have enough space to park it here.
But I could summon it from its out-of-town parking area.
And it would turn up at the doorstep.
And I would get in with my dog, and my wife,
and a nice bottle of wine, and a good movie.
And I would say, ooh, Chamonix, please.
Chamonix being in the French Alps.
And we'd wake up in the morning, you know,
hundreds of miles away.
You might not want to drive a big RV around
when you got there, but that's all right.
Because you could just tell your car to follow you.
And so you could wake up the following morning
and take your dog for a walk in a different country,
having slept through the travel process.
Or another example I like to give
is I'd really like a self-driving car
for when I'm walking.
Tell me more.
So I like hiking, right?
And so much of, certainly here,
so much of going for a walk
involves finding a nice place to park
and doing a circular route
which brings you back to your car again.
And what about if you're driving along a road
and you see a beautiful view,
and you say, hey car, stop here, let me out.
And you just get out and the car carries on
and you walk over the fields,
and you walk over the hills, and you cross the rivers.
And at some point, which you don't have to decide in advance
when you get tired, you meet up with your car again
and you have a comfy chair to take you home.
But the fact that you leave your car in one place
and have to return to it in the same place,
again, is something that is perhaps an artifact of the past.
And maybe in the future people will say, what?
You always had to do sort of circular walks
to get back to your transport?
That's crazy.
And so, yeah, it'll be really interesting to see.
In, I think in five decades time,
people may have a very different view of transport
from what we have compared to the five decades ago, right?
What was happening in the 60s?
Well, the cars weren't really fundamentally that,
not in that kind of way, that different from-
Much the same, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Even just in those ideas that you just mentioned there
about your car picking you up later,
has me pausing because I think that it's very important
to challenge our assumptions
about the technologies that we're currently using.
And I would imagine that's kind of
one of your defining characteristics
in much of the research and the projects
that you've worked on in the past and currently,
and certainly in the future.
And that always gets me sort of excited, I think,
is we need to test those assumptions.
I have a keyboard in front of me.
Well, why should I be typing on a keyboard?
The thing's ancient, if you really think about it
in the same context, right?
Isn't that bizarre?
How have we stuck with the QWERTY keyboard for this long?
That is really strange
because everybody knows it's inefficient
and there've been so many attempts to replace it
with other keyboards in the past,
with other layouts like the Vorjak keyboard,
which is much better in terms of efficiency of typing
or with completely different keyboards.
But it has stuck with us for a very long time.
But even there, you see,
I think that people as old as me are just not,
most of us, we're just not good at typing at speed
on small phone soft keyboards or iPad keyboards.
Certainly.
I love my iPad and I love my iPhone,
but if I actually want to type something
that's more than about two sentences long,
I go and find a laptop
or at least go and find a Bluetooth keyboard
so I can use a keyboard to type it.
Whereas, you know, I think the kids today,
you know, they have very, very versatile thumbs.
You know, they can type with two thumbs
what it used to take me an hour to type
on my QWERTY keyboard.
And I wonder when that'll change.
What I do find though,
which is another thing that's happened in the last few years
is that speech recognition has got very good.
I always had a problem with it,
even though, you know, I don't have that strange a voice.
Maybe it's, you know, a transatlantic voice
from the point of view of many people writing software.
But I always had real trouble
with those, you know, telephone voice response systems
where they would say, you know,
they would ask you a question and say,
please say yes or no.
I'd say, yes, I'm sorry, I didn't understand that.
Please say yes or no.
And you think, you know, how hard can this be?
And until eventually after about the third try,
they'd say, please say yes or press one or no,
or press, thank God, and I would hit the key.
Whereas now, because I'm not very good
at typing fast on my phone,
I dictate a lot of stuff to it.
And I find the Siri dictation works really, really well.
And I suspect Android is much the same.
So the whole idea of talking to your computer,
not just as dictation,
I find actually is something I'm doing more and more,
which again, you know, in theory,
you've always been able to do in the past.
But I think that's really come on
in the last 10 years or so.
Partly just because of the amount of data
people can gather.
Do you find that what you,
and you may not know this answer,
I want you to reflect on it.
Do you find that what you dictate to your,
you know, I'll just call them computers,
but it could be your phone or whatever,
that what you dictate ends up being in almost
a little bit of a different parlance
than what you would traditionally type?
Oh, yes, probably.
I think there are people,
or there certainly used to be people,
people who have had secretaries and so on
more than I have, who are,
who, you know, at least traditionally
were very good often at dictation,
or their secretaries were very good at,
you know, turning what they said
into readable and sensible prose.
But I have got quite used to saying,
hello, mum, comma, new line.
Hope you're having a great day, exclamation mark, smiley.
And I am a bit of a stickler for punctuation and things,
so I do get used to saying that and putting that in.
And so whether that affects the flow,
I don't know, no, I haven't thought about this.
I mean, I haven't sat down and dictated
very large passages of text.
It's just that if I'm walking the dog,
you'll, as you know,
a lot of my life revolves around walking the dog.
And I get an urgent message coming in,
it's likely that I will dictate a response to it
rather than typing a response to it,
partly because it's hard to type in while walking.
But it is, to me, you know,
if you had suggested that would be the case 15, 20 years ago,
I would have been very surprised.
And this is the power,
I think most of this is the power of being able
to just gather huge amounts of data,
because if you can get enough voice samples from people,
you can train networks or algorithms,
not necessarily a machine learning type algorithm,
in a way that you just can't do by,
you know, from the days when we, you know,
you had to record 50 people
to test out your voice recognition engine.
Now you can, you know, put it on a website
where 50,000 or 50 million people will end up using it.
And that just completely changes how easy it is to do this.
And so I think the internet is responsible
for many more things like this working simply
because of the amount of data you can gather so easily.
What's fascinating to me is that community efforts
around making some of these things possible,
you know, we see the open street maps
of the world and such projects,
but a lot of this sort of like democratic data
that is so useful to humanity,
like the power to dictate accurately,
it feels these days like that power is actually controlled
from, you know, a few corporations
who are doing some amazing things in allowing us to,
you know, dictate into your phone and such.
How do you feel about that being sort of centralized
in a way and do you think there's a future
when these companies don't exist?
That is a very interesting question.
I mean, you could do this on a big scale
if you could get people to volunteer their data,
but it's very hard to explain to users
what it could be used for,
what privacy issues you're actually giving up,
you know, and to get people to tick a box saying,
yes, you can do this is quite hard
unless they're getting something very tangible in return,
like, you know, the ability to search the web
or something like that.
And it is amazing what at the moment we are willing
to give up in terms of being able
to type into a Google prompt,
but it is also amazing the power that that gives you.
And so we think for most people think
that that trade-off is worthwhile.
And of course, you know, things like Facebook, Twitter
are, you know, on a whole different scale of data gathering.
And this whole idea that you are the product,
if you can't tell what the product is,
you are the product is really, really true here.
But the question is, do we believe that overall,
this is a trade worth making, right?
How much privacy are we willing to give up
in exchange for me being able to dictate to my phone
or me being able to ask my Amazon Echo to do,
you know, something for me like turn the lights off.
And everyone's different about this.
A lot of people are conspiracy theorists, right?
A lot of people have a great distrust
of large organizations and so on.
I don't in general, you know, I tend in that direction,
but it's a sliding scale.
And I think it's very hard for people to understand
the implications of the data they are giving away.
And it's very hard to predict,
even if you do understand this stuff,
it's very hard to predict what they may be useful for.
So I suspect over the coming decades,
we will get better at assessing what privacy we're giving up
either for other people's corporate gain
and often for our benefits.
And it's just really hard to describe.
But I think a lot of this is an education thing.
It is amazing to me.
So my wife also works at Cambridge University.
She's interviewing students very shortly
or has just been interviewing students
for the next academic year.
And I realized that most of them learned to read
after Twitter was founded.
So they haven't, right,
they have never known a world without Twitter.
And, you know, and that makes me feel old.
I remember when I realized-
That makes me feel old.
Right, I remember when I realized
that the students she was interviewing
had been born after Star Trek.
You know, I mean, after Star Wars,
the original Star Wars, that made me feel old.
And that's like in the 70s or something.
People growing up today, people coming to college today,
people going out and getting jobs and getting married today
have never known a world without Twitter, many of them.
And it's interesting.
And Facebook, and that's part of their lives.
Now, does that mean that they're better able
to assess the impact this has on their lives
or, you know, whether they just take it as normal?
Douglas Adams, you know, had a wonderful phrase,
which I'm going to get wrong,
but he said it was something like,
anything that was invented and existed in the world
when you were born is perfectly normal and natural
and part of everyday life.
Anything that's invented between, you know,
when you're 18 and 30, or maybe between when you're born
and when you're 30 is new and exciting
and you'll probably get a career in it.
And anything invented after you're 30
is against the natural order of things.
And so, yeah, it's hard.
I really don't know what impact this will have,
you know, in the longer term on our society and so on,
that people have grown up with this.
But it's so easy to be focused on the present
and you think, well, it's not that long ago
that people were saying, you know,
kids today, they're growing up,
they've never known a world without the telephone
or they've never known a world without the printing press
or they've never, so whenever we get concerned
about new technologies, you have to think,
well, this has happened before and humanity is still here.
This comes up when you talk about electric cars, right?
You know, which need much less maintenance
than traditional cars.
And what's going to happen to all of those people
involved in the automobile industry,
involved in servicing these cars,
who at the very least are going to have to learn new skills
and probably are going to have much less to do and so on.
And particularly my wife's from the Detroit area.
So this is the car related stuff,
it's very much in her mind.
And then you think, well, hang on,
the same thing happened to blacksmiths,
you know, not that long ago
when people stopped needing horseshoes and all of that.
And that whole industry, that whole profession
vanished in a very short space of time.
But often, you know, long enough that the people
who were doing it, you know, gradually retired
or died or whatever, and just nobody knew took it up.
But it is interesting, I think,
that often we have these doom and gloom predictions
about technology.
And I certainly do this too.
And you think, well, yes,
and what happened when the printing press
came along, similar things.
And so I wonder for you, you know,
since maybe in this conversation,
you and I are both dinosaurs,
but how is it for you that you've kept that
forward looking perspective in both your personal life
and your work life to, you know,
because I read earlier,
many of the sort of companies and ventures
that you've founded or been a part of,
that have sort of always kind of pushed your envelope,
your personal envelope forward.
So how have you been able to keep that interest
in new technologies fresh for you
and that you've been able to always be excited
about the next thing?
Well, part of this is just I love gadgets, right?
So I like playing with this stuff.
And I often thought that what I really needed
when I was starting a business,
I used to tell this to my investors,
you need to find me someone
who's really interested in business.
I'm not a good business person
because I'm not that interested in money.
If I were, I would have more of it by now.
I like money because it lets me play with technology.
And what you need to find as my business partner,
Mr. Investor, is you need to find someone
who likes technology because it enables them to make money.
And then we would, that would be a good partnership.
And so, yes, for whatever reason,
I'm just a geek and I like toys.
But I think there are some useful things.
One of my favorite, I'm very fond of quotations,
but I don't know who first said this,
but I've always liked the saying
that if you're the smartest person in the room,
you're in the wrong room.
I certainly agree with that.
Right, so I have deliberately gone out of my way
to hire people who are smarter than me
or to work in universities
with people who are smarter than me or whatever,
because otherwise, how are you gonna learn, right?
If you know more than everybody else around you,
you may feel good for a brief period,
but you'll be the same dull person 10 years from now.
And if you can always be looking for people
who are gonna challenge you,
people who know more than you,
people who program in different languages from you,
in my particular case,
or understand this new machine learning stuff
in a way that you don't or whatever it may be,
then you have to be more humble,
but you also learn a great deal more.
And I think that's part of it.
And that works for anything, right?
In my case, it's technology,
but frankly, if you're the best artist in your art group,
then you're probably not gonna learn much
from the other artists around you.
Or if you're the best musician,
then it seems to me that this is a good rule
to apply to life anyway.
If you're better than everyone else around you,
go somewhere else.
Well, and yet there's something to be said
for mentorship as well,
because necessarily there's someone in that room
who's subjectively the best at whatever it is.
Yes, that's right.
So I guess somebody always has to be best.
One person has to be best.
And yes, it's quite correct.
You should always try and help those
who have less experience or less expertise
or less skill than you do.
But if you're always top of the pile,
I think then that's a bad place to be.
If you're doing that, if you're mentoring,
if you're helping, if you're teaching,
then that's wonderful.
And you should do that.
And you should probably also make sure
that you don't spend all your time doing that,
but you go somewhere where you're learning
and you're expanding yourself.
I think you just nailed it.
That's the key is don't keep your environment stagnant,
change your environment
so that you change your challenges, right?
I think that's right.
As someone said, you should,
the key to a happy and successful life
is to, you know, step outside your comfort zone
at least once a day, kind of thing.
And I've heard versions of that,
that say once a week or once a year or whatever,
but nonetheless, if your life becomes very comfortable,
then that may be what you want,
but you can keep learning until you die
or you can become very comfortable,
you know, 50 years before you die
and not learn anything ever after.
So that just depends on your personality, I think.
But anyway, that's part of my rule is yes,
always to try and mix with people who are smarter than me,
which is not difficult.
Which projects are taking you
outside of your comfort zone these days?
Like which, where are you pushing yourself in some ways?
Ah, that's a really good question.
Actually more, well, at the moment
it's more related to hobbies.
I do like, I used to say, I still do say,
I'm a jack of all trades and master of, well, very few.
And I think different people can find satisfaction
in different ways.
For me, I love knowing a little bit about lots of things.
And some people like becoming really, really expert
on one or two things.
And that's a really interesting difference in personality.
So I have a lot of hobbies, right,
about which most of them I am far from expert in,
but I like playing with photography,
I like riding horses, I like paddling a kayak,
I like sailing a boat, I like scuba diving,
I like hang gliding, you know, all of these things.
And a lot of them I've done a very small number of times,
but you've had that experience, right?
And it's almost like a sort of bucket list mentality,
which I think is probably a terrible thing,
but I think it would be sad to go all the way
through your life and never have done scuba diving.
Have you dived, Brent?
You know, travel is certainly a thing I chase.
So I've not done scuba diving yet,
but I have done paragliding.
Oh, excellent, excellent.
You mentioned hang gliding.
I've certainly done some paragliding.
So adventure is certainly on my side.
And this is great, right?
You get to see the world
from a completely different angle.
And I love diving, but I haven't done it
for 10 years or something.
But you can look at a stretch of water
and you can say, I have some image of what it's like
being underneath that.
I mean, diving is great fun,
because it's just like flying.
You balance, you find your level and you maintain a level
and you float over the little fish or corals
or whatever is underneath you.
So that's part of it.
But you also have a view of a whole world
that somebody who stays above the surface
all their life never has.
And I think flying is just the same
and all of these things.
But so I like trying to have the experience of doing this,
not just a one-off tandem parachute jumps, for example.
That's not quite enough for me.
It's better to do a tandem parachute jump
than never to, it is better to jump in tandem
than never to jump at all.
But it's, but really part of the experience
is actually voluntarily getting up the guts
to throw yourself out of an aeroplane,
which is something no sane person would normally do
when you realize what a wonderful experience it is.
And so I like collecting these sort of experiences
and going just a little bit further
than knowing the bucket list I have jumped out
of an aeroplane, but I'm not really an expert in anything.
And for me, that's a fun way to spend life, right?
You've done enough of these things
that you can, when, if you read a book or watch a movie
or hear someone talking about it,
you'd say, yeah, I can empathize with that.
I've been there, I know roughly what it's like
in a way that you can't do
if you haven't had that experience of it.
Well, and I've been reflecting
as you've been sharing these experiences
on how I wonder if these sort of short-term dives
into an experience, an adventure, let's call it,
I wonder if they inform imagination for you
because you mentioned seeing below the sea
and the depths of the sea and how, if you've never done it,
you don't even know what that reference point is like.
And so I wonder if chasing adventure,
both in these kinds of like paragliding
and those kinds of physical activities,
but also in exploring new technologies
might inform our imagination as to pushing the boundaries
of what's even possible.
I think that's right because I think that
innovation is a very strange thing.
If we go back to technology for a moment,
almost any invention is invented in dozens of places
at the same time, particularly now, all right,
because everybody has access to the same information.
There are millions and millions of people out there.
A lot of them are smart.
They can all read the same papers
or see the same websites or get access
to the same technologies.
And so this is, things get invented
at the same time in multiple places.
And this has always been the case.
It's the story of Alexander Graham Bell
and his patents for the telephone and so on
is a really interesting one.
There's another chap whose name I'm not gonna remember now.
I want to say Edward, no, Thomas Gray, something like that.
But it's interesting, isn't it,
that I can't remember his name, right?
And yet he actually has a much better claim
to be the inventor of the telephone
than Alexander Graham Bell does.
And he, you know, the story goes that Bell
just happened to have more friends in the patent office.
And so, it's a nice joke, did you know that Leonardo da Vinci
invented the first telephone, but it wasn't any use
until Alexander Graham Bell invented the second one.
And when he tried to call up Leonardo,
he'd discovered he'd been dead for 400 years.
But I think that most things are invented
in many places at once.
And so, often the way we take leaps forward in innovation
is by cross fertilization.
It's like genetics.
It's when, you know, two species do manage to interbreed
that you get something, you know, really new.
When the genetic pool is made more diverse.
And so, yeah, I think if you can mix with people
from widely different disciplines and, you know,
whether that's through your social circles or your church
or your university or whatever it may be,
if you can put yourself in a room where you discover
that actually the thing you've been doing
as a medical technology is actually very useful
for scuba divers or the other way round,
which might never occur to you if you haven't at least
spent time with people who scuba dive
or actually done it yourself.
So, yes, perhaps there is something.
I wouldn't want to read too much into that.
But I do think that in the same way as, you know,
human reproduction works by mixing gene pools, right?
And that's a very effective way of coming up
with new human beings.
I think it can be a very effective way of coming up
with new ideas.
And if you have too limited a gene pool from which to draw,
we know about the problems that that can cause with genetics
in very small populations.
And so I suspect the same is true of innovation and ideas.
Richard Dawkins was right when he talked about memes
in the early days.
You know, he talked about memes long before memes became
something that we talk about on the internet.
And it was this idea of ideas that can reproduce themselves,
be spread, and what causes an idea to be successful.
And he was comparing that to natural selection
and evolution.
And, yes, I think you have to mix some ideas.
So I don't know whether really my jumping out
of planes on parachutes has had any real impact on my ability
to come up with new technologies.
But, you know, at least if you're
interested in a wide range of different technologies,
then perhaps you are more able to see opportunities
when something new comes along.
But I wouldn't really claim that for myself.
But I think people are really good at this.
Often it's because they read very widely,
or they have a widely varied background.
I'm curious, in the same vein as this discussion,
I know you have a little bit of experience with the patent
system.
And I'm curious to hear from your perspective
if you think the patent system is good,
or if it's maybe a challenge for innovation in sharing ideas.
Because it has this sort of maybe combative feel
to it, from my perspective.
It's really hard.
I don't have a better answer to this, I think,
than anyone else does.
On the one hand, I think that patents are very, very often
misapplied, or at least acquired for the wrong purposes.
They are acquired often far too easily.
Though I have to say, I haven't done this for a while.
I did a lot of patent stuff in the past.
I haven't done it for a while.
It's a sort of an arms race.
I mean, I don't know if it's still the case.
IBM used to be the largest holder of patents,
and certainly the most frequently acquiring.
And I've worked out at one point that they,
I can't remember the number, but they
were gaining huge numbers of patents per day,
certainly per week.
And you think, where do these go?
They aren't making use of all of these innovations.
This is not to criticize IBM, by the way.
Everybody does this, or lots of people do this.
These are ideas that they've managed
to get through the patent system,
get some sort of stamp on them, and they
go in a filing cabinet somewhere,
or now in a database somewhere, just
in case they ever need to be used against somebody else who's
making patent claims against them.
And you say, oh, well, we'll give you 50 of our patents
in exchange for being able to make use of this one of yours
and so on.
And that just doesn't seem to me what the system was designed
to do or is good at.
There's also the problem with patents, certainly
in the dot-com era and software in general,
that software moves much faster than the patent office does.
And technology often moves much faster than the patent office
does.
We would apply for intellectual property in some of my startups.
And by the time it was granted, the company no longer
existed, often, or had moved on to doing something
completely different and so on.
Having said all of that, I have been a great beneficiary
of patents in the past, not my own.
A good friend of mine, Martin King,
who sadly is no longer with us, came up
with the T9 predictive text system.
Do you remember this?
Yeah, of course, I do.
And it was a real change in the way
that your thumbs worked on early cell phones, for sure.
For those younger than us, basically,
on the old-style phone keyboard, you
would have two or three letters assigned to each key.
And if you wanted to send someone a text message
and you wanted to type the letter O,
you would have to press whatever it would be, a 6, three times.
Because 6 meant M, N, and O, or whatever.
And so you'd have to press it three times to get an O.
And basically, what T9 did was use a dictionary lookup
so that you would type the sequence of keys
that you wanted, one per letter.
And it would work out the very small number of words
that could actually match that sequence of keys.
And then you just had to pick between one or two of them
if there was more than one.
And so generally, you only had to press one key at a time.
Now, actually, what's interesting here
is that people often don't know where this came from.
Martin was originally working on eye-tracking technologies
for people with severe disabilities.
So in the early days, this was, oh, gosh,
this must be in the 80s or something.
And he was looking at eye-trackers,
which were big and bulky and very expensive
and only worked if you held your head very, very still
and so on.
And he came up with a really low-cost, very simple way
of doing basic eye-tracking, which
was he had some glasses, which he wore, and little ring
of LEDs around the rim of the eyes,
and little optical sensors.
So what would happen is basically,
if you imagine each of these LEDs
lights up in turn in a sort of clock pattern,
I think there were 10 or 12 around your eye.
And as it lit up, another 10 or 12
optical sensors would pick up how much reflection
there was from your eye.
And so very simple, no vision, no cameras, no anything here.
We're talking about the 80s.
But because your eyeball is not spherical,
the different readings that you got from this,
from this one LED and the 10 sensors,
would read different amounts.
And so they could work out roughly which direction
you were looking.
And you then move on to the next LED and light it up again
and pick it up with the 10 sensors.
And you basically do that very fast.
So what you got when you're wearing these glasses
was, in the periphery of your vision,
you would see these glowing red spots.
And you could look in their direction.
And the system could tell that your eyes were
moving in this direction.
And so for people suffering from paraplegia or other problems,
you could start picking up signals, serious signals,
just from eye movements.
And so the next question he had was,
can you actually type on a 10-key keyboard
if you've only essentially got 10 different positions
you can look at?
And he did a lot of work on this and then
and how you would disambiguate.
And then he realized that there were
other things around which had sort of 10, 12-key keyboards.
And so this technology got used in mobile phones.
And it was interesting for a whole variety of reasons.
Because now we live in a world with app stores and so on.
This was just about the first third-party technology
that was really sold to Motorola and Ericsson and Nokia
and so on and embedded in all of those phones.
Back then, it changed the way people typed.
We were talking about keyboards, right?
Yeah, certainly a full circle.
Yeah, that's right.
And so Martin and the company he started,
TJ, which was based in Seattle, got some good patents on this.
And they were sold to AOL at just the right time.
And Martin, therefore, had reasonable resources
just at the time that I became friends with him.
And we went off and did various projects together.
And so I have to say that a small number of good patents
indirectly funded my salary for many years.
And several startups I was involved in.
And I think they were valid patents.
And I have come across many valid patents which
have done what the patent system is meant to do.
And I think they do this in a lot of fields.
But whether they really do it in my own field of software
and computing, very often, I'm not at all sure.
So I have very mixed feelings about the patent system.
I think it's widely abused.
Do I think the world would be better without it at all?
I'm not sure.
I think 50 years ago, they were very valuable.
And now, if you got rid of the patent system,
I wonder what would happen.
The argument in favor of it is usually
that things like pharmaceuticals that take many, many years
to produce and are terribly expensive to produce only work.
You can only make that viable on a commercial basis
if you can then protect the results of your work.
And of course, the whole idea originally of the patent system
was the alternative is to keep everything a secret.
You never reveal anything about how your product works,
how your drug works, how whatever.
You keep it as a trade secret, which
is a very nice alternative to patenting
if you can keep secret how your app works
or your technology works.
But the problem is then that there
is an incentive for people never to reveal anything
about their discoveries.
And so the patent system is designed
to give you a monopoly for a while
in exchange for sharing your knowledge with others.
But when there are so many thousand new patents per day
filed for tiny little things, and so many of them
are invalidated, in the end, so much of the patent system
and whether a patent is successful
just depends on who can afford the most expensive lawyers
if it's ever challenged.
Then I'm not sure how much it really fulfills those roles.
But the basic idea of the patent system I think is a good one.
But it's undergoing many challenges at the moment.
It brings me to two thoughts, and I
think I'll touch on one at a time here.
I see some relations to open source software in this regard
because one group of people who are writing software,
generally the open source stuff, is they're free to share it.
They feel like sharing it is one of its best features
and yet want to guarantee that it's being shared.
And it feels like patents in some way,
it's a way of sharing and yet giving credit where it's due.
Do you feel like there are some similarities there?
And do you think open source software has
some of the similar challenges?
I guess that's right.
Open source, particularly the old GNU public license,
which for those who don't know, basically
said that we are sharing this technology.
So for example, you write a program,
so much of the modern web, so much of the internet
runs on open source software, which was often
shared with this basic license, which says it's here,
it's freely available, you can use it, you can modify it,
you can redistribute it.
But if you redistribute it, you have to redistribute it
on these same terms.
So if you come and you make an enhanced version,
you can use it in your product, but you also
have to give away the source code for the software
in the same way as you got it for free in the first place.
And I'm simplifying here.
There are many other different open source licenses
which don't say that, but that was
one of the key ones that drove a lot of the original open source
movement.
And I think it has, in general, worked very well.
And so much of the modern world runs on open source software.
It is phenomenal, actually, that that has basically won.
It hasn't necessarily won on the desktop for most people,
but so much of Amazon and Google and the internet
infrastructure as a whole just wouldn't
exist in their current form without open source software.
It has ended up being the model that has worked there.
And in the past, there have been various attempts
by companies like Microsoft to capture
a segment of the internet and control it,
or often the whole internet.
And they haven't been able to because the open source,
firstly, the open source product has been better.
And secondly, the people who are actually
going and implementing, the people who are going and creating
their new products based on the internet
some want to use the open source one
because they can see its advantages.
And that's not always the case, of course.
But as a general rule, there is certainly
a very big part of our modern world
that is driven by open source.
And not everybody recognizes that, I think,
that this model has worked amazingly well.
There are now a variety of open source licenses.
And you can pick if you want to give your stuff away
to the world.
Often, this is driven by, I'm happy for anybody in the world
to use this.
But if anybody starts making money out of it,
I think I should have some share.
Or different people have different motivations, right?
If I give this away, is it really
right that somebody else takes this and then goes and makes
lots of money from it, directly taking my product?
And so the degree to which you allow
the stuff that you've given away to become
part of a commercial product is often
the basis of various different open source licenses.
So I'm a huge fan of open source.
I use it all the time.
I make my living from it.
I have written various open source projects.
The discussion about open source versus copyright
is a common one.
The discussion about open source versus the patent system
and how those are related isn't considered very carefully.
The original GNU public license did
allow people to release software without losing
complete control of it.
And so probably encouraged an awful lot
of idea sharing in a way that might not
have happened if it was a case of either give it away
or keep it completely secret.
And so I guess the patent system is a bit like that.
Yes, it encourages people to share things
and, in exchange, gives them some rights.
But how well the patent system works, I think,
is questionable.
Open source, I think, has often proven to be rather better,
though it wouldn't be applicable to all the cases
that the patent system applies to.
One of the very large innovations in software,
as you mentioned, is permissive open source kind of licensing,
which has enabled innovation between groups
and often between people who don't even know each other
and do get connected because they have shared ideas.
And yet I wonder, maybe the patent system is,
I was going to go somewhere, but now I'm reconsidering.
I was going to say, maybe the patent system is licensing
for physical products, but these days it's not.
It's just for intellectual property, isn't it?
Well, the patent system, exactly what you can do
varies a bit around the world as well.
So I'm rusty on this, but it certainly
used to be the case that business process patents,
for example, were things that you could file in the States,
but certainly not in general here and in Europe, I think.
So a method of doing business wasn't
the same around the world in terms
of what you could patent, the degree to which you could
patent a software algorithm has also
varied in different parts of the world.
So what works in one place doesn't work in others.
I mean, I think there is a problem with patents
that they're very cheap to apply for,
and they are very expensive to maintain.
If you actually want to get one and look after it and keep
it valid and extend it to cover the whole world and so on,
that starts to become a fairly expensive process.
Just getting a patent in the first place,
particularly if you write it yourself
and don't use a lawyer and file it in,
it's much cheaper here, I think, than in the States,
for example.
You can get a patent for a couple of hundred dollars
kind of thing if you're willing to do the work yourself
and you're good at it.
But as soon as that passes certain deadlines,
starts to become international, and so it
starts to become very expensive, which
is good because it means that you don't get patents kept
around for frivolous reasons.
Often, they do become too expensive to maintain,
and so the ideas behind them are kind of released
into the public domain.
But the downside is that big corporations
can afford to keep maintaining them and expanding them
and extending them, whereas small individual inventors
often can't or small startup companies often can't.
And that means that it's often those big companies that
have fewer incentives actually to release this stuff
into the world, which is why I talked about this idea
of an arms race.
You know, you sort of keep a filing cabinet
full of patents almost as a currency
so that you can exchange, you know, if you're Nokia,
you can exchange them with whoever your competition might
be when you find that they have a patent that you want
to license.
And it seems to me that it's used a lot for that
and that they are harder.
They're nice and easy to get, but they're much harder
to actually make use of if you are a smaller company.
So I think that's a challenge.
You know, you did talk about how computers and software
and the ideas around that world are some of the most creative.
And one question that has just stuck with me
since you mentioned that, that I hadn't got a chance to ask,
was I wondered what issues or problems in the world
you were hoping that computers and technology might solve
that you're not seeing currently solved?
Is there anything that really, like, gets to your heart
and you think, oh, I would really love that to be
innovated on or solved for a small group of people
or a large group of people?
There are lots of little issues it would be nice to solve,
and they are very much first world problems.
And I am conscious that I do live very much now.
I was born in Africa, actually.
I was born in a very poor area of Africa.
But I only lived there for my first three years.
But that's always been part of my sort of upbringing.
My parents were very much involved in dealing
with people at the opposite end of the economic spectrum.
And so this is sort of in my bloodstream a bit.
I've always been conscious about how fortunate we are
and how far most of the world is from this.
But it is the case that technology has
made this huge difference.
So I was involved, we mentioned earlier, in Dio.
So this was a not-for-profit organization
that Martin and I set up.
And Dio is the Swahili word for yes.
Lovely.
So it's a terrible name for an organization
because nobody knows how to pronounce it.
Or indeed, if you hear it, nobody knows how to spell it.
We were looking for an idea for this startup
that we thought would have some benefits for the developing
world, and we wanted something that
was positive and affirmative.
But we used to tell people that that's
what we were looking for in our brand, something
that was international and affirmative,
and that was all rubbish.
What we were actually looking for was a domain name.
And I looked for all of the names
I could think of in English and French and German and so on.
And I thought, well, let's try Swahili.
Because I knew a little Swahili, not very much now.
But sure enough, the first word I typed in was yes.
And I could get ndio.com, ndio.org, ndio.basically
anything I wanted.
And so I grabbed it.
And we used to claim that this was the reason we
had named this organization the positive yes
as an African world.
Swahili is a fairly major language.
It's I think the first language of about 50 million people
or something, and the second language of quite a few more.
And yet, I realized after a while
that the fact that I was so easily able to get
the word yes in this major language
was actually quite significant.
It was indicative of the problem we were trying to solve.
Why was it that after the DNS system had become crowded,
every word in English had been snapped up pretty much,
and we were trying to come up with a word for an organization
that I could still get the word yes in Swahili?
And it showed just how little internet coverage
there was in East Africa.
And so after a while, I actually started
to tell this story because what we were trying to do
was bring computational power to large numbers of people
who couldn't otherwise afford it.
And the way we were doing this was at the time,
the thing that was really expensive,
and as it happened also very environmentally unfriendly,
was building a PC.
And the screens were less expensive then.
The keyboards and mice were less expensive.
The PC was the expensive bit.
And so we thought, could we use open source software
to share a PC effectively between several people
rather than, say, in an internet cafe
having one PC at each desk?
PCs were, thanks to Moore's law, were eight times faster
than they were three years ago.
But people weren't typing eight times as fast,
and they weren't reading web pages eight times as fast.
So we should be able to share a PC between eight people
and they would have, okay, they would have the experience
that you might have had two or three years ago,
but that was just fine.
And if you could share the cost of a PC,
just halve it or even more than that,
then you massively increase the number of people
who could have access to that kind of technology.
And this was at about the time
where everything was starting to be digitized.
If you don't have access to a PC back then,
it was like, well, why would these people want spreadsheets?
Well, the answer is that we could see
that the world was moving towards digital music
and digital photography and digital dictionaries
and digital Wikipedias and all of this stuff.
And the more of the world you could give access to that way,
the better.
So we had a technology that we thought would enable that,
and it was a fun project.
And when you work on a project like this,
which is basically for whatever reason you hope
for the good of humanity,
by the way, you can get really good publicity.
Journalists love to talk to you.
People like a good news story for their news articles.
It's much more interesting than the latest product
from some big corporate manufacturer.
If you can say this idea that might change
the way internet cafes are built in Tanzania
is a much more interesting story for many people.
So it's a really fun thing to work on.
If you get the chance to work on technology
for the poorer sections of society,
I would really recommend it
because it can be very satisfying
and can make quite a difference.
Now, in our particular case,
the technology we developed didn't take off so much
for that particular use because what we failed to predict
was the sudden and massive spread of smartphones,
which were completely unknown pretty much
when we started the project
and of course took over the world.
And this is often the case.
And we were doing this just about the same time
as the one laptop per child project,
Nicholas Negroponte's thing,
which is often now derided as a failure.
But I think it was incredibly important
because for those who don't know the story,
this was a team based at MIT originally
who said we're gonna produce a $100 laptop,
which was completely unthinkable at the time.
You know, laptops cost $1,000, not $100.
And this one laptop per child idea
that could you give everybody in the world
or at least a much larger number of people in the world
a laptop was so outrageous
that it got lots of attention and in the end failed,
they didn't actually manage to do this.
But what they did do was dramatically cut the cost
of a large number of technologies.
You know, you can now buy extremely cheap laptops,
not necessarily very good ones,
but you may not be in a financial position
to have that choice in a way that you really couldn't,
I think before the one laptop per child
just really got people saying,
how cheap could you make this technology?
And showing that it was possible
to get at least close to that number,
which was a completely unthinkable number beforehand.
So I always see that as a success.
I do think that it was just after that
that people started producing these very cheap netbooks
and other machines,
which did actually make quite a difference
in large parts of the world.
It's just that the mobile phone came along
as it happened and became the dominant way
that people access the internet.
Well, and also the mobile phone is wonderful
in that there are flagship versions
that are a thousand plus dollars
for some of the most advanced people who are doing,
well, hopefully they're using their cell phone
to its max potential.
I don't think that's actually true most of the time,
but you also see cell phones these days
that are sub $100 that are somewhat reasonable
or the used market because of the nature of mobile phones
is filled with three-year-old flagships
that are the price of a few cups of coffee.
So there's something to be said for that, too.
Yes, and it's great fun watching
how other parts of the world leapfrog bits of technology.
So in many parts of Africa,
they didn't really ever have credit cards.
They went straight from cash payments
to mobile phone-based payments
without that intervening technology,
whereas- Probably a good thing.
Probably a good thing, right, yes.
And they often went from never having a phone line
to having a mobile phone without landlines in between
and so on, and it's fun to see what works
in different places for a whole variety of reasons.
It sometimes places leapfrog technologies.
So even in the sort of first world,
we, for a while, we had, in general,
much better mobile phones here in Europe
than in North America,
and that was because you got them earlier in North America,
and so they were analog-based.
And so there was much more inertia there.
We kind of started, I mean,
we did have analog mobile phones here,
but essentially the mass deployment of mobile phones
was a bit later here and was based on digital standards,
whereas it started in the States on analog
and therefore was much harder to shift over.
And so often places that get technologies later
get a chance to take advantage of the developments
that have been done elsewhere, and that can be quite fun.
Yeah, huge advantage for sure.
Quentin, I'm realizing we've had a lovely conversation
and time has totally just passed so quickly.
We've been talking for a long time, haven't we?
I didn't know we were going anywhere
in this sort of direction, but...
I think it's been lovely.
I typically, you know, I read a rather long description
of some of the things that you've done in the past,
and I only think we've touched on two or three of them.
So I think I would love to have you back for another chat.
That would be delightful.
Well, thank you.
But I do have a question for you.
It's a little bit related to what we just touched on,
and maybe it's a nice segue.
I was curious if there is something
that you would like to share with listeners.
Maybe you want to nudge them to think about
a certain problem or there's some great book
you've read recently or something like that.
Is there anything you'd like to share?
Okay, yes.
Well, I have a couple, okay, I've got a couple of ideas.
One is a book.
So yes, I would like to recommend
Charles Arthur's book called Social Warming.
Now, due disclosure, Charles is a friend of mine,
but he's a very respected tech journalist and writer
who has written for many publications here in the UK
and internationally.
And he's written a book called Social Warming,
which I think is a very good book.
In fact, I hesitate to use the phrase required reading,
but I do think actually it is very important
for people to read.
And the basic idea of social warming,
the reason he uses that title is that he's comparing it,
obviously, to global warming,
the effect of social networks
and the effect of the lifestyles we have
that have contributed to global warming.
And he's saying that global warming didn't come about
because of some big single environmental catastrophe, right?
We suddenly found ourselves in a very different world
with a very different,
we suddenly recognized we're in a very different world
with a set of very different problems
because of lots of small decisions
that have been made over the past decades.
And he's then looking at social networks
and saying, what are the, you know,
there's very few big major disasters come about
because of social networks.
So he does look at some very dramatic world events
and talk about what led to those.
But he's saying, if you take a world
where so many people get their information,
get their social interactions, get their news,
get their belief systems,
get their understanding of medicine and pandemics
and so on from social networks,
where they are essentially getting them from algorithms
that are tuned for very specific things,
if you take that over an extended period,
what will that do?
And how will we view the world
if we don't appreciate this,
if we don't appreciate that our information is,
everything we're reading and viewing and so on
is being fed to us by algorithms
that are designed to keep us engaged,
that are designed to shock us or make us,
you know, amused or insulted or enhance our prejudices
or whatever it may be that keeps us engaged,
then that's a different world
from a world we've been in the past,
where, you know, some obviously news and things
has been worked on that basis,
but it's never been fine-tuned to this degree.
And so I do recommend Social Warming, very good book.
Will make you think about the world where so much
of our background information comes from social networks
and their algorithms.
And a friend of mine to whom we recommended this,
after she'd read it, she immediately went and bought copies
for all the teachers in all of her children's schools
and said, you must read this, probably hated her.
But nonetheless, that was how valuable she thought it was.
And it is, Charles is a very thoughtful,
very considered person, and this is not scaremongering.
This is very sensibly thought through and argued,
and it's enjoyable reading.
So I recommend Social Warming by Charles Arthur.
The other thing, as you gathered from talking,
I do like gathering quotations.
And so I leave you with one of my favorite quotations.
Now, the problem with quotations is that
as soon as you hear one that's supposedly said by Einstein
or supposedly said by JFK or something like this,
you realize that, or Mark Twain or whoever, yes,
you would discover that actually it was never really said
by those people.
But so this is one that is often attributed
to Eleanor Roosevelt, but I think also
to David Foster Wallace, the writer,
and probably was actually said by somebody else.
But I've always liked this.
It goes, you would worry less what people thought about you
if you knew how infrequently they do.
Powerful words, for sure.
And those certainly, they hit me personally, I would say.
I think that's great.
You're worry less what people thought about you
if you knew how infrequently they do so.
And so whoever said it, I think that's a great phrase
that I think it's well worth remembering.
But is that not such a perfect follow-up
to exactly what you were saying
about Charles's Social Warming?
I see those two as very, very related
in that so often we're worried about what others think of us
when we share some of our accomplishments,
especially online.
I think that is correct.
But I think also often the problems
we have with social networks because we
don't worry enough about what people think about us.
Or maybe we're more isolated, perhaps,
from the normal social cues.
And this may be something that just humankind
has to take some time to get used to,
that trolls online are there because they haven't yet
developed the sensitivities that we've developed as a society
over many years.
But one of the things Charles talks about
is the reasons that things like outrage.
People have talked about social networks
as a sort of engine for outrage.
And why is this?
Well, it's because we find things
that we think outrageous very compelling.
Or we find people who disagree with the ideas of our tribe
to be something we care a lot about.
I use tribe in a general sense here.
Because that was valuable in the past.
It was what bound the tribe together.
And that was an important social construct.
And so outrage had its purpose in the past.
It's a bit like overeating, right?
Being able to eat large amounts of food when it became
available was a valuable thing in the past.
And now it's always available.
It becomes a problem.
And being able to respond appropriately,
the emotion of outrage is not necessarily a bad thing.
But as soon as social networks cotton onto the fact
that this is very, very engaging,
this is built into our social architecture
at a very low level, they realize,
aha, our algorithms, it's not necessarily
a human intervention.
But the algorithms will discover that things that are outrageous
do keep us engaged.
And therefore, we see and see more and more outrageous stuff
or things that make us angry or things that also make us laugh.
But some of the more gentle, more positive, more cultured,
whatever it may be, sadly, parts of life
are sadly not as engaging.
And it's that instant engagement,
which is sort of like sugar, that's bad for us
if we have too much of it.
I'm not sure whether that ties back into that quote.
I think it may be not.
But I do think perhaps it ties in perhaps more
in terms of the sort of, yes, the image
that you portray through TikTok or through your YouTube
channel or whatever.
How much is that the real you?
And how much is that something you
are carefully constructing and portraying because of what
people will think about you?
I guess that is a very important part of this.
And the question becomes, which part of ourselves
do we want to show and should we show?
And I think there's something to be
said about meeting someone in person
because on various levels, both consciously and subconsciously,
you get a sense of a person.
And I feel like with all of the powers and gifts and beauty
of the internet, that's not a thing that's easy to reproduce.
That is interesting, isn't it?
Yes.
And I mean, here I am supposedly having brunch with you.
So this whole idea of brunch with Brent
doesn't work across time zones, right?
It's true.
It's a long time since my breakfast here.
It works for you.
But can you imagine what COVID would
have been like if we hadn't had all of the communications
technologies that we've been party to in just
the last few years?
Most laptops come with a camera built in.
And all of a sudden, that's become so much more important
than it ever was.
We could never have imagined three, four years ago
how important this would be, and it has turned out to be.
So I think you can understand a lot in face-to-face
conversations.
And we're just doing audio here, but I
think the value of video conversations is significant.
And being able to see somebody, it is funny now
how I've come to assume that calls in general are video
calls.
Of course.
This is what happened on Star Trek in the past.
You could actually have a video call with Captain Kirk,
who was three rooms away.
I mean, that was an amazing idea back then.
And now, I take for granted that I
can have a video call with someone
while I'm walking my dog.
You see, it all comes back to walking my dog in the end.
I think that's such a lovely place
to pause our discussion for now.
I think we will certainly get recording together again soon.
But I've just got to say, you're leaving me
with this huge and satisfied smile
from just thinking of all the lovely topics
we've been able to explore together.
Well, thank you, Brett.
You've been very patient with me rambling on,
and I hope it will be well-edited afterwards
to take out some of my less coherent bits.
And please, everybody, remember that it is evening,
getting on into the evening here for me.
So I'm not as, I like to think that I
would be more coherent at brunch if it were brunch for me.
Well, next time, maybe we'll do that, and I'll stay up late.
We'll do that.
What time?
Yeah, you'd have to stay up very late.
No, no, this is just fine.
This is just fine.
OK, thank you so much, and we'll chat soon.
Thanks, Brent.
It's been great fun.
And thanks for you and all the guys at Jupiter.
I think you do a great job.
And I really enjoy many, many of your podcasts.
And so it's a great honor to be a small part of it.
And I hope you give some people enjoyment in the way
that you've done for so many other people.
Thank you for that.
Oh, yeah, thank you so much.
That's a huge compliment.
So much appreciated, and I will share.